Articles Events Topics Write For Us

Using Webfonts

by Bram Stein · October 03, 2017
Published in Typography & Web Fonts

A Quick User's Guide
Now that you’ve selected a font, let’s put it on your website. Webfonts are defined in CSS through the @font-face rule. If you’re a web developer, you’ve most likely written, copied and pasted, or at the very least seen an @font-face rule. For the sake of completeness, though, let’s quickly run through a basic example:

@font-face {
    font-family: Elena;
    src: url(elena-regular.woff);
}

This creates a new webfont family that can be referenced through the font-family or font shorthand property. But something’s missing here. When referencing a webfont in a font stack, always make sure to include at least one fallback font in case the webfont fails to load. Here, if Elena fails to load, the browser will fall back on the generic serif font family:

p {
    font-family: Elena, serif;
}


We’ll talk more about fallback fonts and how they can be used to make your site appear to load faster in Chapter 3. For now, let’s keep our fallback stack simple by including only the generic serif and sans-serif font families.

Font Families
Creating a font family with multiple styles is accomplished by creating an @font-face rule for each style and using the same font-family name. The following @font-face rules create a family with a normal and bold style:

@font-face {
    font-family: Elena;
    src: url(elena-regular.woff);
    font-weight: normal;
}

@font-face {
    font-family: Elena;
    src: url(elena-bold.woff);
    font-weight: bold;
}

You can use this font family in your CSS by referencing the family name and weight in your selectors. This applies the regular style to paragraphs and the bold style to strong paragraphs:

p {
    font-family: Elena, serif;
}

p strong {
    font-weight: bold;
}

Font Formats
The src descriptor tells a browser where to get a font file. The previous examples used a single font format, but you’ll often see URLs to multiple font formats combined with format hints, which are appended after the URL using the format("value") syntax. Format hints tell the browser what the format of the font file at a given URL is.

@font-face {
    font-family: Elena;
    src: url(elena-regular.woff2) format("woff2"),
        url(elena-regular.woff) format("woff");
}

If you list multiple formats, modern browsers will pick the first format they support based on the format hint. Therefore, it’s important to list webfont formats in the order of best compression to least. Even though format hints are optional, always include them—they let the browser know about the format without needing to download the font. For example, if a browser does not support WOFF2, but does support WOFF, it can skip the WOFF2 font file based on the format hint.
Browsers support several webfont formats: OpenType (TrueType), EOT, WOFF, and WOFF2. Some browsers also support SVG fonts, but they’re deprecated and should no longer be used (and should not be confused with the new OpenType-SVG format). EOT, WOFF, and WOFF2 are technically not font formats. They are compressed OpenType files with varying degrees of compression. WOFF2 offers the best compression, followed by WOFF and EOT (Fig 1).

Fig 1: Browser support for font formats at the time of writing. Look for up-to-date and version-specific browser support for font formats at caniuse.com.

In researching coverage for all browsers, you may have come across something called the bulletproof @font-face syntax by Fontspring. The bulletproof syntax uses:
EOT
WOFF2
WOFF
Raw OpenType, and 
SVG font files for maximum browser coverage.
But is the bulletproof syntax still relevant? No. In fact, I think it’s harmful. SVG fonts are deprecated and only supported by browsers that are no longer in use.
Because most websites no longer support old browsers, I highly recommend using a simplified syntax. This simplified syntax covers all modern browsers, as well as slightly older ones that are still in active use, such as Android 4.4 and earlier:

@font-face {
    font-family: Elena;
    src: url(elena.woff2) format("woff2"),
         url(elena.woff) format("woff"),
         url(elena.otf) format("opentype");
}

Permissions & Copyright Privacy Policy Fonts by Webtype
